---
layout: post
title: Johannes Kepler and his 3 laws
---

This will be a series of the three men that have made physics and astronomy what they are today. 

Since the days of Aristotle, it was assumed through rigorous philosophical reasoning that the planets moved in perfect concentric circles. The universe surely could exist in no other fashion! The geometric idea of a circle gave philosophers a rigorous explanation for the perfection of our universe. 

It allowed a path so precise that no point was too close or too far from the origin. The orbiting body would return to the same point in space ad infinitum, a continuous orbiting body, infinite symmetries, and an explanation for why the sun sets every night and rises the following morning. This seemed good enough for the people.

Johannes Kepler was taken under the study of Tycho Brahe, a wealthy astronomer who saw the mathematical talent in Kepler. Brahe had been a keen observer of the heavens, however not so great of a mathematician, he had collected a vast wealth of data for Kepler to sift through. He wanted to determine why Mars appeared to move backwards in the sky each night sometimes, what we call now retrograde motion. 

Brahe was jealous of Kepler’s mathematical talent, his patience and persistent. Brahe believed in a geocentric model of the solar system, and actually withheld the bulk of his observational data so that Kepler could not find the actual truth, as Brahe was sure that he would. 

Trying to make the circular and geocentric orbits that Brahe believed in work, Kepler eventually gave up. He used numerical methods of approximation and curve fitting, however there was always an error that was too high for Kepler to be satisfied with. He began studying a particularly challenging work by an old Greek polymath Apollonius of Perga. The work itself explained fairly simple concepts that are well known to mathematicians today, and taught to first year calculus students, however it was incredibly convoluted, and very dense reading. 

The conic section that grabbed Kepler’s attention was that of an ellipse. An ellipse is defined 
